Our derivation has two premises and our conclusion is R,
So I'm going enter my show line for R.
The first premise is Q
And the second premise says:
If either P or Q then R.
I need to find a way to do modus ponens with my second promise
And the antecedent of this premise is P ∨ Q
Now I don't have P ∨ Q
If I had P ∨ Q, then I could
use that with modus ponens to get R, so if you look at this pattern on these two lines...
We have if P ∨ Q then R, and then on this next line it says P ∨ Q is true, so from
those two pieces of information, we can infer by modus ponens that R.
If only I had P ∨ Q, I could do that! Is there a way that I can get P ∨ Q from what I have?
Yes! Look at line 2: I have Q.
And our new rule, ADDITION,
says that if you have a sentence, you can infer a disjunction, with that sentence as one of the disjuncts.
I'm just going to do ADDITION on line 2. This gets me P ∨ Q, and I can do my MP, and I made it to R.
So this is a direct derivation. And I'm done!